For the labs and midterms, the
thing is,
it seems the workload for
the both the labs and lectures are a
little bit high, so I decided to
extend the deadlines for the lab
and lectures, both of them. As you
can see for the lab, I mean this
week, we have two weeks. Also for
this week's lecture, which
I'm going to release it on
Wednesday. Again, we have a
deadline of two weeks, but it
starts from the next
lecture and the next lab.
So for the lab two and the
lecture 2. the previous ones
the deadlines are the same, it doesn't
change, but the new ones
starting this week, actually you're
gonna have two weeks for you
to do the assignments
for the lectures and labs.
Uh, regarding the mid term, I
mean, it's actually, it was kind
of clear for me, but it seems
that it's not clear for the
students. The thing is, it is
clear that the questions in the
assignments are much more harder
because you have one or
from this week, two weeks, to
solve the questions. But in the
midterm, I mean the questions are
much more easier. The thing is,
I mean you have limited hours,
for instance just two hours.
Although I'm trying to
plan it as a take home exam so
you have one day to open it, but
when you open it, you have
only two hours to do the mid
term exam. I'll put the
instructions, I mean after, but
the thing is, because you have a
limited time to answer the
questions, the questions are kind
of much more easier than the
lecture assignments and I hope
actually this helps you
during the reading week. I'm
going to plan some practice
in the office hours, just to do
some to practice on the lecture
assignments
questions and practice more on
the sample midterm exams, so you
could be kind of ready for the
midterm. Uh, this is one thing.
Oh, I forgot to.
Record the session.
Oh, Sean you already
started the recording. Yes.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you,
thank you. And yes, that was
the
thing again. In the
discussion board, some
students actually put some
question about the
assignments, questions in the
assignments. If you go there,
you can see that sometimes
the students put some hints
or also myself, I put some hints
to help you to solve the
lecture assignments
or even the lab assignments.
So this is the first one.
This next one is I'm going to
do a quick recap on what we
said last week about building
a digital system.
So we'll start with analog
systems. We said that these
systems are processing the
continuous
entities. Uh, OK.
Basically, it's an electrical
system with a voltage and within
the time, it is a kind of, I mean
analog system. The changing
voltage within the time
continuously. But in order to
build an information processing
system or I mean to analyze or
build the algorithm to work with
the voltage or with the
continuous entities we have to
break it into discrete units.
Then we said that we already
proposed the numbering system as
a kind of
system that can break the
continuous entities into
discrete units, and we introduce
some symbols or digits to
represent those continuous
entities, so we already have the
numbering system as a kind of
digital system representing the
discrete units by digits.
Now we
said that we want we want to
build a machine to do the task
for processing for us. So we
have the numbering system from
the theory, and we have electric
power in the engineering
perspective. So we want to
integrate them to build a
machine. The first question was
at what base or what numbering
system we have to choose. We will
start with base-10. The most
immediate one and
We said that in order to
represent the digit in base-10,
we have to break the voltage
into 10 different units. For
instance, let me enable my
laser.
So you can see that I mean we
break the voltage from zero to
10 into discrete units, 0 to one
is representing 0. 1 to 2
representing one, etc. But there
is another continuous entity
time, so we have to break time
into discrete units too. So we
did that and then it could be
seconds, minutes, weeks or days,
any discrete units, and then
we put these two together. We
have discrete units in voltage
and time, and itself could
represent a digit.
For instance, as long as the
voltage is changing in this time
spot within this unit, it could
say that this system is
representing the digit 2 and
etc., but the problem was that
because in some time, the voltage was
actually passing multiple units
in voltage, so we cannot say that
within these times, the
system is representing what. So
a lot of ambiguous cells are
here. We said that in order to
address these ambiguous
cells. We introduced the concept
of granularity, meaning that the
size of unit.
We'll start with smaller size of
time meaning that
these smaller fine grained
granularity. Uh, this one helps
because it gives less chance
for voltage to change a lot
within different units. So for
instance here, because the time
is a little bit, I mean smaller,
so the change of voltage is just
limited to the unit 3 to 4. So
we can say that within this time
the system is representing three,
for instance. But still,
there lots of ambiguous cells
like this. If I'm here, we can
see that the voltage is changing
a lot, so within different
units. So we can say that
The system is not deterministic
in representing the number or
digit in base-10.
Another solution was that to have
a bigger or a larger units in
voltage, so instead of just zero
to one, we could say that 0 to 3
represents one unit, 3 to six
another unit, etc. So, but the
thing was that, we have to reduce
the base-10 to base.
Five because we have
base-4 because we have 4
units, 0123. So we said that from the
numbering system, we said that if
we decrease the number of spaces,
it means that we have a less
range of numbers given the same
amount of position.
But we can
have less, I mean,
ambiguous cells
because the chance for voltage
to change is very
low so. Here you can see that
for instance, in these cells.
Although the voltage is changing
from different units from the
different values, but because it
is in a bigger unit we can
represent it as zero.
But there still are some
ambiguous else like
zero, like the first time
step here, and also here.
At the extreme, we said that
we can just split the voltage
range into 2 units, zero to
five, 5 to infinity, and then
this one gives a lot more
deterministic value in
the cells, but the thing is we
have binary system, so we can
represent given the same amount
of position, we can represent a
less range of numbers.
And we said that we need a
system to be reliable,
robust to noise, and
because of the engineering
limitation, it's better to
stick with base-2,
because although we are
limited to less range of
numbers, it is much
more reliable. Instead of
having a base-10, but much
more noisy numbers.
An I said, I mean indeed, the
first computer was ternary based
on three values and
we will talk about decimal
computers, which we will cover
later, and another reason it's based
on the binary system was that it
has a deep mathematical theory
behind it because the
mathematicians and
logicians from philosophy, they
already had this system of two
values: true and false. So we can
benefit all those theories for
our binary system. So
the first one who produced the two
value logic was George Boole.
I mean in this book.
In the 19th century he
introduced Boolean algebra,
kind of algebra for two value
systems. For I mean, as a
philosopher for laws of thought.
But we could benefit those
theory for building a computer
system. A reliable computer system,
and the first one who did that was
Shannon in his master thesis. So
he used the Boolean algebra with
the electric power in order to
build a computer system to do the
information processing, which is
called switching algebra.
Then we said that, let's
build a binary computer. I mean,
having a binary system as the
numbering system and electricity
as the power.
So we said that we could imagine
low voltage representing zero,
and high voltage representing one
and anything between these
ranges is deterministic because in
real world when you change the
voltage, you cannot suddenly
change it from zero to five. It
passes, I mean it takes a
little bit time to increase the
voltage, so there is some area
of I mean ambiguous ambiguity,
but this is because of
engineering limitation
and we call this positive logic
because high voltage is 1.
And then we put this example and
this is the logical design of
the circuits. If this switch is
closed, it's connected to the
ground, which is the default in
positive logic, which means it's
zero. If the switch is open, it's
connected to the power source of
electricity, so it is 1.
You could have negative
logic, meaning that the high
voltage is zero and low voltage
is 1. And it's kind of invert
of the previous system, and this
is the logical design of the
actual circuits for this logic.
Uh, we said that in this course
and in the next
course, basically I mean by
default, when we are going to
build a computer system, the
numbering system is base-2,
binary, and the logic is
positive, meaning that the high
voltage is 1.
The approach we use here in
this course is bottom up
approach, meaning that we are
going to build the smallest
unit and then put this
smallest unit in order to
build a larger units, and at
the end, we promised to build a
CPU. I mean the most complex.
digital unit that I mean
does all the processing
or analyzing on the
information.
The thing is, when we are going
to build the computer, there's
different steps. The first step
is designing the computer in
just paper and pen because the
thing is, before going to
manufacturing, and I mean
producing a lot of useless or I
mean costly physical
computers, we can at the
design level, employ
some mathematical formulation
from Boolean algebra in order to
come up with a
much more smaller or simpler
computer, but accomplishing
the same task or equivalent to
the other computers
that have more, I mean units.
This way when we
build a computer, in
manufacturing step, it is
much more cheaper.
So that's the design task.
I mean in the design task
we are going to
design a computer which is
much more simpler, but the
same power.
And the task of building
computer is for engineers. It's
not our task. And we'll start
with logic gates. We call this
logic gates because it is based on
the Boolean algebra, so the
logic comes from the logicians.
And the gates comes from the
electricians who use the Boolean
algebra to work with the
high voltage and low voltage to
represent zero and one. So we
call these units logic
gates. The first logic gate we
introduced was not.
We said that we call them
inverter or X bar.
This is X bar or X prime,
meaning that did not of X and
so it accepts one input and the
output is represented as a
boolean expression or Boolean
function. And this boolean
function is equal to X prime or
X bar, which means that
whatever the input is, we have
to invert it and this is called
inversion bubble. If there's a
low voltage or zero we have to
increase the voltage to high in
order to represent it as one.
If it is high voltage,
we have to decrease it
to low voltage as a 0.
The immedite application of the not
was I mean, applying
the ones compliment so we can
build the circuits that
does the one's complement,
just accepting the input,
applying the not gates on the
input and then the output is
going to be the one's
complement.
The second logic gate was the
AND and the AND was a Binary
Gate, which means that it
accepts two inputs or it has two
operands. From the math, we know
that AND works like this. So if
both the inputs or all the
inputs are one, the output is going
to be 1. Otherwise if you have
at least one 0 in the inputs,
the output going to be 0.
And you can show AND with
dots or multiplication or
nothing, just X&Y. That's an AND.
From the math, we know that
AND operator has the
commutative property, meaning
that the order of the AND
operator doesn't matter. So if
you add X&Y and Y&X, the result
going to be the same. So here I
just reverse the order at Y&X, so
you can see the same output.
Whenever based on the same input,
you output the same result for
all the variation of the inputs,
we mean that
both functions are the same.
So you can see that from the
same input, a variation of the
input. The same result has to
you happen, so these two
tables are the same. That's
why we said that the AND
operator is a commutative
operator.
Another thing is that if you AND
any input with zero, the output
is gonna be 0. This is I mean
clear. But the thing is, in
practice, this is a good
approach. Whenever you want to
ignore the input, whenever you
don't want to pay attention to
the input, you could simply
input zero in one of the input
and then the output kind of 0,
meaning that ignore the input.
Whatever X is, I
mean we don't care. The
output is gonna be 0.
The same with the other input
and another interesting
thing with the AND is.
If you AND any input with one, it
doesn't have any impact, so X&1
or 1 by X, any number of 1.
The same input, so X.
So this is again interesting
because whenever you are given,
for instance a gate, that has
multiple inputs, but you only
need a specific number of
inputs. For instance, if you are
given an AND with two inputs, but
you only need one of the inputs,
what should you do with the
other input? You could, if you
are given with the AND operator,
you could simply input one,
meaning that just connect the
input to the high voltage. So it
means that it doesn't have any
impact in your design, so
this is one way. This is an
interesting way to fill extra
inputs when you don't need them
for the AND gates.
And again, if you AND an
input with itself, it doesn't
have an impact, so this is
another way to feel
the other extra inputs.
This is another way to show the
fact that you are inputting
both input with one input. So
just I mean connect the other
input with the first input so
X&X is again same as X. But how
about this one? If you add X
with the not of itself?
So if X is 0 then not of itself
become one and if it is 1,
the not is going to be 0, so
you always produce at least 1
zero in the input. So the output
gonna be always 0. So if you AND
X with the not of itself,
the output is 0.
So this is another way to ignore
the input. So whenever you want
to ignore the input, you could
simply AND it with itself, with
not of the itself.
So and then the output is gonna
be 0, regardless of what
are the inputs.
You can show that. I mean this
is the same. You can show this
instead of just using this huge
figure, you could simply
use the inversion bubble, so it
means that input X goes to one
input of the AND, the other one
going to be not.
And sometimes you could
simply, I mean for shorter
representation X and
then the other input X bar,
and then the same result.
These three are the same
representation.
And we covered all these
things last session. So next is
new topics, so I'm going to open
the slides for today.
OK.
So is there any
questions so far?
No questions.
Let me go back to this.
Ah.
Abdulwahhab, yes yes yeah. As I
said, I mean you can show
the not of X as X prime
or X bar. Or simply just
put not X, so whenever
you see a prime, it means that
it is the not operator, yes.
Oh, Mia asked why not divide the
time into smaller units, we
do that. The thing is.
We are going to do both. I
mean, smaller units of time and
larger unit of voltage, so kind
of gaining both advantages. So if
you decrease the time units, I
mean fine granularity of time, and
increase the units of voltage,
so you can resolve all the I
mean ambiguous cells, so both.
Smaller units of time and
larger units of voltage.
Oh, Abdulwahhab says when we do coding. We
use the exclamation mark for not.
That's another story. I will
tell you the difference. In the
discussion board, I put a reply
to another student. I explained that
to one of these students,
what's the difference between
the exclamation mark.
And there's another, let me show
you my blackboard.
Uh.
So I think we can see yes. In
C or C++,
Dirt types of operators. One
is the boolean operators.
Another thing is the
conditional operators.
In Boolean operators, in
order to apply not, the
operator is this: tilda. It's
called Tilda.
But for the condition, the
operator is exclamation mark.
So in the discussion board, I
explained in depth in
C or C++ when you apply not, you
have to use this.
But the thing is, the way we
use that, you have to use the
exclamation mark. I explain
what are the
differences and why we have to
use exclamation mark
in the discussion board.
So let's go back to the screen.
So let's continue.
Share my screen.
So let's continue with the
AND operator.
The AND logic gate.
So we said Not and
the next step is we
are going to build an
AND with three input. But
before that I have to explain the
design, you know.
So we said that we have the
logic gates, the not and AND. The
not has one input and the AND gate
has two inputs, so these are the
most smallest logic gates or
units we are already given, and the
electrical engineers actually
they manufacture them for us.
So what if we are going to do if
we need to add 3 Inputs.
You go to the market and you can
buy only not gates and you can
only buy AND gates with two
inputs. So how can you build an
AND with three input? So this is
called design. So first you have
to in paper with a pen, you
have to think how can you build
a new structure or new unit
by just a pen and paper
and then you see that OK, I need
these gates to buy so you go to
the market and buy gates and
then attach the gates in order
to, I mean to build your
larger unit so, but you do this
at the logical level, so here at
logical level, it means that you
don't use the physical
perspective, you just by pen,
You think about how you attach
the gates in order to design
your system. So this is called
design. Whenever you build
something at logical level, it
means design. At this on you
have to think of three
parameters. The first one is
that your design must be true
or effective, meaning that it
shows the desired functionality
or it acts how you want.
So if you want to AND 3
inputs but when you design
it, the output is not working
like that. So it means that your
design is not effective or true.
When you prove that your design
is true and doing exactly what
you want, the next step is is
your design efficient or fast?
Efficiency means that
Running some design or some
structure and analyzing the time
it consumes, so is your design
fast when you manufacture? So
when you give it to the
manufacturer to build for us and
you when you use it, is it fast?
Another thing is that optimum
cost. How many logic gates do you
go and buy in order to build
your structure or
your unit. So if you are using
if you're doing the same task
but with less number of
Gates, it means that the cost
is much better, so you have
to think about optimum
costs. So to build
in a manufacturing
perspective or physical
sense, it is much more cheaper.
So these parameters are always
our concern at the design
level, for designing computers at
logical level. So the first
design is AND with three
input as an example.
So. We are given this truth
table. We already know from math, we
know that if we add three
inputs, it acts like, I mean
with two inputs. So as long as
all the inputs are one, the
output is going to be one. But at
least if you have at least 1
zero in the one of the inputs,
the output going to be 0.
So this is the way an AND
with three inputs should work. So
now we have to design this unit.
So this is the immediate
design you can do so. You could
say that I can AND the 1st two
with each other and then AND the
result with the third input.
And this is kind of a new
Boolean expression, so X&Y and
then AND with Z.
This is one way.
Because of the front Boolean
Algebra, which we will cover next
session and in later weeks.
Uh, the end operator has
associative property
because of the commutative
property, so because X&Y has the
commutative property, you can
simply switch the order. So we
could say that Y&X and then you
can bring out the X from inside
the parenthesis and then AND it
with zero. So these are all the
same. So because the order
doesn't matter because of the
associativity property, you can
simply drop the parentheses so
again. Based on the same input.
All these variations output
the same results for all the
variations of the input, so
whenever you have zero, all
zeroes in the input, all these
variations output 0. So it
means that all these columns
are the same.
In other words, AND has the
associativity property. So if
you add X&Z 1st and then AND the
result with Y, it doesn't matter. So
this is a beauty of
associativity property from
Boolean Algebra, which gives us
this property. We could have an
AND with three inputs, because it
doesn't matter how the ordering of
the input is, so we can have an AND
with three input and without any
parenthesis. So by
attaching two ANDs
with two inputs we can have an
AND with three input and the order doesn't
matter.
I mean in fact I mean in
market, the electrical
engineers and computer
engineers, they build an AND
with three inputs so you can go
and buy an AND with three input,
but else otherwise if you don't
find another three inputs, you
have to buy two ANDs with two
inputs and then attach it
together to have an AND with
three inputs.
The next step is an AND with four
inputs, so you could follow the
same design pattern. You know
the way we are. I mean, putting
the gates in different levels.
It's a kind of pattern, so we can
follow the same design pattern
as we did for the AND with three
input for four inputs. So you
can simply X&Y the result AND
with the third input, and then
the result, AND with the 4th
input. So kind of, I mean
applying the different levels
of AND, so this is one way to add
4 Inputs. Another way is this.
This is the new design.
Uh, we can add the first X&Y
and then AND third and 4th
and then AND the result of
them. So this is another
Design, but we know from math,
because of the
associativity property of the
AND, we can drop the
parenthesis. So F1 and F2 is
exactly the same.
You can at home, you can
practice it on the truth
table and you can see that for
all variation of four inputs,
given the same input in the
XYZW, the output for these
two functions are the same.
But the question here is this.
The design question is this. So
now you are going to. I mean go
to the market and buy the gates
to build your AND with four
inputs, so which design are you
going to build? So the first one
is that you have to check if these
two variations are the same of
working properly or
accomplishing the same task you
want. As I said, F1 and F2 are
actually working the same
because of the associativity
property of the AND. So you can
simply drop the parenthesis, so
both are effective and true
By this design, so the
next question is.
Between these two, which one is
much more faster or efficient?
For the
first design, the F1.
As you can see, applying
the second AND with Z, you have
to wait for the 1st AND, so you
have to wait X&Y and together
and then the result going to be
and four Z. With this. So again
when you wanted to AND with
W you have to wait two
step. And then the last one. So
in order to have the result of
F1 you have to wait one step
here. One step here, and then
the third is there going to be
the result. How about the F2?
You can do the AND X&Y in
parallel with Z&W.
So you can save one step
so these two can be done
in parallel and then AND
the result altogether so
With respect to efficiency, you
can see that F2 is much
more efficient because it had
two levels to reach the output.
In terms of cost, you can see
that both designs have three ANDs
so both actually has the same
cost. So the only
thing actually here is that F2
has the advantage because of the
efficiency of the design.
This is the way we compare the
different designs accomplishing
the same task.
You can have am=n
AND with four gates, four inputs
with one and with three inputs.
And then, uh, the AND in the
result will be the 4th input. So
this is one design, and indeed I
mean the engineering right now
in the market, they build an AND
with four inputs because of the
fact that the order doesn't
matter, they could build it for
us. So in the market you can
have an AND with two inputs and
three inputs and with four
inputs. But to my knowledge in
the market there is no AND with
more than four inputs.
So if you need an AND with five
six or more inputs, you have the
build it with these existing
ANDs. So this is one way, so if
you don't have an AND with more than four
inputs in the market, you have
to build it like this. An AND
with four inputs and AND it with
another AND with two inputs.
Or if you only have an AND with
two inputs, you can build an AND
with four inputs like this.
So these are different way to
design a new unit, a larger unit.
Any questions so far?
Ah, Travis asks when we overclock
the component, are we
essentially just shortening the
unit of time? Yes, indeed.
Yes, but it's kind of much more
complex than I mean, the short
answer is yes. We'll see. We'll
see. I mean in the ending weeks
of this course that how can we
introduce the concept of Clock?
What is Clock and?
Uh, what's the relationship
between the Clock and time?
And then we can see what we
mean by overclocking a
unit. We will cover this later.
Any other questions?
So again, I mean just make sure
everyone has the attention.
Please send me some feedbacks.
What you feel I mean so far.
We have 53 students.
Great, Matthew, Moustapha
Ethan. Nice.
So all these materials are
interesting to you?
Ryan, Tiana
Yes, cool.
Great, so let's continue cool.
So let's continue with the new
gate. So now you could ask
that is it possible to build an
or, we already from math know how
the or operand works.
You could say that is it
possible to build an or gate
with not and end. We will see later.
Is it possible or not.
But for now, imagine in the
market there is a new gate
called or. We show the or
like this, it is a kind of I mean
curved version of the AND. So
it's important when you doing
the exam or any other paper. I
mean when you write or show it
in the paper, be careful about
this. You have to show it as the
curve to differentiate
this with AND. So this is
called or. So simply the OR
Gate like this, you can show it
by plus addition operator and as
long as you have at least one
digit of one in the input, the
output is gonna be one. If all the
inputs are zero, the output is gonna be
of 0. So this is kind of the
dual of AND.
So all the inputs are zero. The
output is going to be 0. If at least
one of them is 1, the output
going to be 1.
Like AND Operator, or
operator actually has the
commutative property from
Boolean algebra, so the order if
X or Y is exactly the
same as Y or by X. So if you
change the order, the result is
going to be the same for the
orderings of the input so
The order doesn't matter for the OR
operator or gates.
And.
The way we did with the AND we
I mean, we can do this with the
or. If we put any input with one,
what happens? The thing is, as
we said, if there is at least
one digit of one in the input,
the output is gonna be one. So if
you or anything with one, the
output going to be one. So this
is another way to ignore the
input, whenever you want to
ignore the input by an or gate,
you simply attach one of the
inputs with the high voltage
one. So the output gonna be one
and doesn't matter what is X.
So X is zero or one doesn't
matter, the output is gonna be 1.
This is one thing I mean in the
exam. Whenever you see a one in
one of the input of the OR gate,
do not worry about the other
inputs. You just simply output
one. So this is the fast way to
analyze a unit.
But the thing is, if you
or it with zero, you have to
wait until determining the
other inputs. So or with
zero doesn't have any
impact with the or and the
input is going to go to
output. So this is kind of
ignoring. It's kind of just
passing X directly to the
output.
So another thing is that whenever you
have an or for instance with a
one input, so because or has two
inputs, you could simply fill
the other inputs with ground.
You could simply attach it to
the ground. And use the other
input for your input.
So this is one way to bypass an
input of the OR gate.
What happens if you input the OR
gate with one input? For
instance, X goes to both
inputs of the OR Gate. X or X is
the same as X, it doesn't have an
impact, so the same as X or 0.
And.
x or by its not because if X is
0 then not going to be produced
by a not going to be one and if
X is 1 the not going to be 0
so you always have.
You always have at least one
digital one in the input, so the
output is always one.
This is another way to ignore
the input whenever you wanted to
ignore the input, you could
simply or it with the not of
itself, and then the output is
always one regardless of what
are the Inputs.
So here is another design task.
So now we wanted to build a
larger unit of over with three
inputs. So again, like the and,
we can follow the same design
pattern, so that was the pattern
to design and and with three
inputs four inputs, we can
follow the same design pattern,
but this time for or.
So if we are given if you are
given the task to design an
or with three inputs, we
could say that we could or
the first 2 input and then
or result with the third
input.
So this is the way we do this,
or with three inputs.
As you can see here in the truth
table, if all the inputs are
zero, the output be gonna be 0.
If at least one of them is 1.
The output gonna be 1.
So. Again from Boolean algebra,
uh, the OR gate has the
associativity property, meaning
that because of the commutative
property you can switch the X&Y
here and then because of the
associativity property, you can
simply bring out the x out of
the parenthesis. So you could
say Z or X, and then because of
again, you can switch the order
because of the commutative
property, so it becomes X or Z
and all these varieties so.
You can simply drop the parentheses
because of the associativity
property. So all these
variations. If you, I mean
calculate them in at home,
all are the same.
So this is an or with three
input. Just attaching two or
with two inputs.
Because of the this
associativity property in
the market, the engineers
already built us an over
with three input, so again
it doesn't matter. You put
it X first or Y first.
And or with four inputs are
going to be the same design
pattern like the and with
four gates, so you can attack three
or or you can do the parallel
first and one X&Y or with each
other and then in parallel Z&Y
or with each other and then the
result or. So again, because of
the associativity property,
these F1 and F2, these Boolean
expressions or Boolean functions
are all the same.
Because for all the
variations in the input,
they are put the same result
given the same input.
So again, comparing these two
design for an or with four
gates for Inputs.
Both are effective because both
are true. Both are truly or
correctly do or onto 4 Inputs.
But in terms of cost, both are
the same. Both used three or
gates. 123123 but in terms of
efficiency, the F2 is much more
efficient because you can do
this in parallel X or YZ or W
and then there result. Also you need
only two step for the result.
So any question
with the OR gate?
Yes, this slide gonna be on the
blackboard right away after the
lecture and then the video going
to be uploaded with two or three
hour delay because it takes time
to process the video. But yes.
Oh, the ground is 0 because in
your in the positive logic. So
we said that the low voltage is
always interpreted at 0, so the
low voltage, the voltage zero is
ground from the physics in in
the school you know that. I mean
ground means that the voltage is
0. So when you attach in the
positive logic as we are doing
the in this course, the low
voltage is zero. It means that
just attaching a an input to the
ground means that zero.
Yes.
Last slide this one.
Oh, efficiency is just in terms
of I mean speed or number of
step to accomplish the task. For
instance here the number of
steps you have to take in order
to calculate the OR for four
inputs you have to take one Step
2 step, three step. But in the
second design you have to take
one step. You can do this in
parallel and then two step
through the steps. So the number
of steps is much more less. So
we can set up F2 is much more
efficient than F1 or F1 is
inefficient compared to F2.
So efficiency is kind of.
It's comparing different
design with each other.
Ah. What do you mean by
going from bottom to top
for the results?
Oh, you have to start from
the beginning? Uh, you start
from this time. So you start
here and then go forward up
until the result. This is the
result. So you start from
this side to this.
OK.
Oh, the order when he said the
order doesn't matter. The order
in the input, for instance. Here
we can reorder X&Y.
And we can reorder the z and w all
second reorder this person.
You could put the value here.
You could or X&W 1st and then
Y&Z&Y here. So the order in
the input doesn't matter. But
this is these are called
steps. When you go from for
instance from the left to the
right in order to have the
result, you have to 1st
calculate this and then this
and then this.
Yeah, so let's move on
to another concept analysis so
so far. We are given a task. For
instance, we wanted to build an
and with three input or four
inputs. We are given a task to
design on or with three inputs
or an hour with four inputs. So
we are given a task and then we
design it and then we see that
is it effective. Is it efficient
or is it? I mean costly
next is? Analysis you are
already given the unit, the
design and you're asked to
analyze it. So for instance, I
designed a system and I give it
to you to analyze it in order to
analyze it, you first have to
see what is the functionality,
and then if the functionality is
what we want and then is it
efficient or is it cost benefit,
cost effective or kind of
optimum costs or not, so in
analysis. You already given the
design, you have to check the
functionality of that.
So here is the analysis task. So
imagine you are given this unit.
And and with two inputs and
followed by an not gate.
So you have to analyze it in a
way that you have to determine
what is the F.
So basically to for the analysis
task you have to simply, I mean
just form the truth table based
on the number of Inputs. So we
have two inputs to whole units
so X&Y you could Simply put for
instance A&B. Or you could
simply say for instance and
other variables, for instance
S&Z any type of variable doesn't
matter, so and then you put all
the variation of the input. We
have two inputs or all the
variations are either both are
00110. So there's no other
variations for the input, and
then you have to see given one
instance of the Inputs what is
the F. So this is analysis task,
so let's see. In order to
analyze this unit, you have to
one way is this. Break it into
smaller unit. So you could
simply say that let's ignore the
not operator and think of it as
an and for for now. So F1, what
is F1F1? Is X&Y just one gate?
So there result gonna be 0001
cause. All if all is
1, the and is 1, otherwise the
output cannot be 0 and then
this is the airport, so the
next is applying the not
operator, so you apply not,
but on the F1 and this is the
F1 so you apply not so zero
becomes 1,0 become 1,0 become
one and one becomes 0. So this
is the output of this unit.
So basically X an Y and then
not.
So this is the analysis
of a unit. The most
simple analysis we did.
Indeed, this unit, which is
a larger unit having an and
and followed by a not, is
called NAND, not and so
basically not and or NAND.
We showed in and with
inversion bubble in order to
be shorter form of that so
and followed by a not is
called nand this is a new
gate. So if you go to the
market they already built a
NAND gate for us.
So formally, this is the truth
table for the NAND, so X&Y
Prime. You could show in Boolean
expression you could shown on
like this X NAND by Y upward
arrow is mean is meaning NAND.
So, but let's look at the
behavior of the gate.
As you can see here, it's kind
of Just inversion of the and
here. If all the inputs are one,
but it's going to be 0 for the
and gate if all the inputs are
one, the output going to be one.
But here if all the outputs are
one the if all the inputs are
one, the output going to be 0.
So kind of invert of the and.
If you have at least 1
zero in the input, the
output gonna be 1.
So you see, the difference of
the and and NAND Gate.
So because of the commutative
property of the and.
Because X&Y is the same as
Y. And X.
So because of this property of
the and operator, the NAND
operator has the commutative
property too, so X&Y, not is
equal to Y&X not. So basically
this is the operator for nand x nand. Y
is equal to y nand X.
And what happens if we input the
NAND gate with same input? If
you put X in both the input of
the nand. Gates
so. What would be the result?
Marco says ex Prime October hub
says ex prime. So let's see what
happens. So again, this is
another analysis task so we have
to break it into 2 units. First
doing the and and then doing the
not. So if you break it into 2
into the first one F1 going to
be X&X so doesn't matter ending
an input with itself. So this
same zero and one so if it.
X is zero, X&X is 0 if it is 1,X
and X is 1. So this is the same
as X or in putting an and gate
with the same input doesn't
matter. So and then
applying nots.
So X&X not.
Is equal to X, not so you
can see zero becomes 1,1
becomes 0 so.
Basically, if you input a NAND
gate with the same input, it
acts like, not.
So if you go to the market
and you couldn't find not
gate, but you could find an
and gate, you could simply
buy it and then whenever you
need a not you could Simply
put the axe into both input
of the NAND gate it
produced, not. So this is
the kind of conversion
between the gates.
So in short, NAND with the same
input acts like, not.
So the next question is like
and an or is it possible to
build nand gate with three
inputs? So before this I put
some questions in the poll
just to make sure that we.
Are you actually correctly
follow the topics? So I put the.
Uh, in the chat box I put it a
link, so please open this link
and send me some feedback that
you can see the.
Link.
So let me start the.
Poll.
So can you see the nice?
So please start answering this
poll. The question is.
You go to the market and you
could find only and with three
input, but you want to and
with. You have to only two
inputs X&Y or A&B, or I don't
know for instance W&Z. You
have two inputs, so is it
possible to employ the and
with three input with for a
task which needs only two
inputs?
So we have only nine
participants. How many students
in the class? Right now we have
55 student in the class, so.
Other students please
participate.
So with the and we said that if
you and an input with a 0.
You always gonna and up with
zero because you introduce at
this one zero in the input. So
and Gates put zero in the
output. So if you fill the other
input of the and with three
input with zero, it's kind of
always outputting 0, so the
first one is not the correct
one, the second one. If you
input an and with one.
Uh, because still we have to
wait for the other input to see
whether they have zero or no so
filled third input with one is
kind of working for us.
The third one is cannot use the
third. We said that we can fill
the other extra inputs with zero
and one for the and. We can
input it with, fill it with. One
doesn't have an impact.
And the 4th one is attaching to
the ground attaching to the
ground means filling with a 0.
So the first option and the
last one is the same for the
and gate. If you attach it with
a grand or zero, it means that
the output is always 0, so it's
not the correct answer. So
let's see the correct answer.
Most of you actually put the
correct answer, which is the
feeling the extra inputs when we
are given the and up with one
because and with one doesn't
have an impact. So let's move on
to the next question.
How about or?
If you are given an or with 3
input and but you only have
two inputs, so.
The same options as before, but.
Is it possible to use it for I
mean? Or no, it's not
possible. We have to wait
until we have an or with
two inputs in the market.
So for the or gate, we said that
if you or anything with 0
doesn't have an impact, you have
to wait for other input to see
they have whether they have at
least one digital one in the
input or no so attached with
ground. Or, uh, attaching with
fill it with zero. doesn't have any
impact on the OR gate.
But about 1:00, if you fill the
other extra inputs with one, it
always output one. So you don't.
I mean want this because you
ignore the two inputs.
So the answer is the first
option and the last option,
so let's see the answers
from your side.
Yes, actually most of you
put the correct answer. So
fill it with zero or filled
with ground. So ground in
positive logic is always 0.
Let's go to the next question.
Let me see what is the
next question.
Oh, the next question is
still wait until they
covered the next question.
Thank you so much for your
participation in the poll so.
Let's move on to the next task.
NAND.
So.
We are given this question with
this task. We want to build nand
and with three input. So this is
a kind of Design task, so we
already designed for and with
three input or with three
inputs. So we could say that we.
Follow the same design pattern.
We want this. three inputs and
then not so kind of  nand with
three inputs. So this means that
if all the inputs are one, the
output going to be 0 exactly the
invert of the and gate. And if
you have at least 1 zero in the
inputs, the output going to be
1. So kind of just invert of the
and operator, so this is the
task. Will have to design if you
follow the same design
pattern as we did for the and
and or we could attach it, stack
it the nands with two inputs
together. So the first 2 input
NAND with each other and then
the results NAND with the third
input. So let's see, let's
analyze this design. So we
designed this. We have to make
sure that this is the correct
design. So let's analyze it. So
in order to analyze it, we have
to see what is F based on the
old variations of the Inputs, we
have three inputs. All the
variations are eight. I mean
different variations,all
0123456 and seven.
So. As we did for the
NAND, first we have to see what
is F1. The output of the X&Y
NAND, and then F1 nand by Z. This is
F1. So XY not so XY not
is 00 and and not so so the
and is 0, not becomes one.
Here the uh and is 0 not become
one. So here, as long as you
have at least 1 zero in the
first to input, the output is
1. If all X&Y is 1, the
output going to be not of
the and, so zero the same for
all these variations.
And then F1.
And zero, not or NAND with not
so the F. So this is the result,
F1 and Z not or.
instead of f1, we have X&Y not so
this is meaning that F1.
And with Z and then not one and
with 00 nots becomes one.
The same as here one and one.
F1 and with the z zero and then
not. So if you follow the
same thing just I mean
consider this one this column
an only the z column you end up
with this result.
This is evident that the result
of this way we design for the
nand with 3 input is totally is
sometimes equal, but sometimes
different results. So this is
what we wanted.
But this is what we designed.
So as long as the inputs are
here like this, the Outputs are
the same, so it's OK. But for
these variations, if Z is 1.
The output of our design and
the output of what we wanted
was there is different.
So it means that our design is
not correct, so it's not
effective at all. So when it is
not effective, we don't go
further for the efficiency and
cost, it means that the design
is not right. So let me come
back to the.
So this design is not a good, I
mean correct design or effective
design. So in order to fix this.
You could simply say that.
We already have an and with
three input. We could simply
apply nots on after that. So
then you can have a correct
design. So and and with three
input and then applying it not.
And you can see that. I mean
this is what we designed here
by this design, and this is
what we wanted. So you can see
that exactly mean for all
variations given the same
input, they have the same
result.
So it means that this column and
this column is the same, so this
is the correct design.
So. Uh, so comparing
these two designs?
F1 stacking two NAND with two
inputs or an and with three
input and then applying not.
You can see that F1 is not true
at all. An F2 is the correct
one. So when the design is
correct and the other design is
not correct, we don't go further to
check the efficiency or the
cost. Because we always the
first priority of us is the
correctness or effectiveness.
So this is the way we design a
nand with three input. So if we
input NAND is this not this? Be
careful about that.
And one thing is that because
of the associativity property
of the NAND gate, so the order
is doesn't matter for NAND
with three input. So again, if
you are giving an ad with
three input, the order doesn't
matter, because this is
actually an and operator
followed by a not. So you
could simply say that and and
with three input has
associativity, property and
the order of the input doesn't
matter.
But be careful, you could say we
couldn't say that we can drop
the parenthesis because this
prime this prime. This not
applies on all the Inputs.
You cannot simply drop the
parentheses, because if you drop
this, this prime goes to X
only. And this primes goes to
y So Be careful this
time. So here we could say
that it is associated inside
the parenthesis.
So how about this? Let's look
at. I mean, look at this design.
Although this is not a nand with
three input, we could say that
this is actually X nand, Y and then
nand by Z. So this is the truth
value as we saw before. Although
this is not what we wanted, but
this is 1 unit, so we could put
more focus on this and analyze
this. What's the benefit of
this? An ETC? For instance, we
can say that is it.
Associative this way we can
reorder it or no, we can drop
the parentheses or not in the
lecture assignments I put in a
question for you to kind of
explore the OR analyze this
design. Is it the mean,
associative, or know an? What's
the benefit of this design?
So the second analysis we are
given we have 5 minutes so we
can cover this is.
We followed a nand with not. We
can do the same with or. So is
it possible to follow and or
with a not we can say yes. This
is the design, so what's the?
What's the functionality? We can
analyze this. This is another
analysis task, so we are given
this unit and we are asked to
analyze this unit.
So we could simply as we did for
the and, you could simply break
it into two step for all the
variations of the inputs. We
have two variables, so all the
variations are like this. We can
say that what is the output?
So we could simply as we did for
the NAND. What is F1,F1 is or
X&Y, so this is the result if we
are given all zero, the output
is 0. If you are given at least
one digit of 1 in the inputs,
the output going to be 1.
And. Followed by and not
operator, so XY prime. So
basically zero becomes 110 and
etc. So you can see that this is
a kind of not or.
So whenever you have an over you
can just, I mean not the OR
operator. So in or if at least
one digital one happens in the
in the inputs, the output gonna
be 1. Here going to be 0 if all
the inputs are zero. Here the
output gonna be one. So because
of this this is called not or or
nor. This is the way we call
this gate in the market. They
already built this gate for us.
an or  followed
with the not.
So this is the official, I
mean truth table for the nor
gate, so you can show the nor
with the Downward Arrow X nor
Y or X or Y not. This is
the way we show nor.
In the exams or in the papers or
in the I mean websites or etc.
They usually follow this form.
X or Y prime even for the
net they said XY prime. They
they rarely use the upward
arrow or downward arrow. They
usually follow this notation.
And because of the commutative
property of or.
Uh, so we can change the order
of the input for nor gate two,
so X or Y not is equal to Y or
X not so the NAND the nor
operator has the commutative property.
So my question for you is
this? Uh, what happens if we
input nor with the same
input? So in both input of
the new or we just put one
input, XX goes to one input,
an again to other inputs.
What happens to this? So
again, please go to the poll.
I guess I put it as a
question in the poll.
Yes, uh, let me back to
the.
Poll and then run it.
So please answer this question.
So if you input.
Both inputs of nor with the same
input X, what happens?
It acts like and it acts like or
not or nand. Basically because it
is an or first, so it becomes X
or X, so X or X is equal to X
and then followed by a not. So
it becomes x bar so.
It is clear that
it acts like, not.
So let's see the result.
Most of you could actually
answer the correct answer, so
again, let's back to this slide.
So. Here is the analysis for
this unit. So we could say that
so the first step is X or X.
X or X, or X or X,X equal to X and then
followed by a not.
So X or X, not so if it is zero,
it becomes one. If it is one, it
becomes 0, so it acts like not.
So again, if you go to the
market and you couldn't find an
not gate, you could simply by
the nor gate and then input the
nor gate with the same input in
both of the inputs, so it acts
like not. So for the nand an nor
if you input the same input in
both the Inputs.
It like it works like not.
How about Nor with three input?
Meaning that if we are given
three inputs.
So let me see we have
time for this.
I have two minutes so we can
cover this, I guess. So if
you are given three input and
we wanted to apply all
followed by nots.
Basically, if all the inputs are
zero, we want to output one if
at least at least one digital
one happens in the input, we
want to output 0.
So this is the behavior of the
nor with three input. So let's
design it as we did for the and
and. Or so again, a
stacking two nor gates
with each other.
If you do this.
The first One X nor Y and then
becomes F1 and then F1, nor with
Z becomes this.
This is the result.
But this is not what we wanted.
We wanted to input zero in all
positions an if all the inputs
are zero, we want to output one.
So, comparing this, uh, the
functionality of this design.
But a by what we wanted with
what we wanted, you can see that
although in some when disease
one they act similar. But when
the Z is zero they act
differently. We wanted this one,
but this design outputs this.
So this is not the correct
or effective design.
So we could simply say that we
by in or with three input an,
then attach and not to that. So
this is the way so and all with
three input followed by a not.
So this is the true way of
building a nor gate with three
input. And again, because of the
associativity property of the OR
or. Sorry, this is the tip. Here
we have to put plus here plus
plus X or Y or Z.
So because of the associativity
property of the OR, we can
reorder the input of the OR so
ZYX or ZXY and etc. And then
followed by a not.
So whenever you are given
a nor with three input, this is
actually an or with three input
followed by a not.
So again, comparing the first
design and the second design,
the first design is not what we
wanted, so it's not effect based
on our requirement, but the
second one is I actually doing
the same. So after is the
effective one. So we choose this
one and then we forget about
the efficiency of cost. Because
this is the correct one.
Again, like the nand in the
lecture I asked you, let's
analyze it more. I mean, if you
stack nor gate with each other,
is it associative? Can we drop
the parenthesis or no? And
what's the behavior? What's the
use of this unit? Why we have to
build this unit?
Or is it possible to? I mean,
making use of this design or no?
And then doing a quick recap.
So. One thing is that we are in
the positive logic, so we we are
interested in when the output
gonna be 1, otherwise it is
attached to ground or 0.
With the nut, whenever the input
will have only one input, so
whenever the input is 0.
Low voltage, the output going to
be high. High voltage, so this
is this statement. Whenever we
we see one or high voltage in
the output. In the and, if all
the inputs are one.
The output gonna be 1.
With the OR at least one input
is 1, then the output gonna be
one. So this is the statement
for the OR gates. If you have
or with ten inputs, you could
seem as long as you see at least
one input with digit one, you
don't wait for the others, you
just simply output one.
(NOTE: The condition for NAND in the slides is INCORRECT! The slides have been corrected on Blackboard. The correct condition for NAND is if at least one input is 0, the output is going to be 1)
(NOTE: The condition for NAND in the slides is INCORRECT! The slides have been corrected on Blackboard. The correct condition for NAND is if at least one input is 0, the output is going to be 1)
(NOTE: The condition for NOR in the slides is INCORRECT! The slides have been corrected on Blackboard. The correct condition for NOR is if all the inputs are 0, the output is going to be 1)
(NOTE: The condition for NOR in the slides is INCORRECT! The slides have been corrected on Blackboard. The correct condition for NOR is if all the inputs are 0, the output is going to be 1)
So this is kind of
interpretation or behavior of
the gates so far.
Next I mean session. We
gonna cover new topics
universal set, but I'm ready
for your questions.
So practically, wouldn't
you attach it to the ground
for assurence? It is always
0 Nicholas.
I'm not sure I get your
questions. Wouldn't you attach
it to the ground for?
Yes, as I said, I'm in
grand in the positive logic
ground is 0, so you can
whenever you need's to
produce zero. There are
multiple ways, one is the
attaching to the ground,
one is or.
Sorry, and with it with an
input so so you could simply
bring a wire and then an
not it with itself so it
always produce 0. There's
another way to producing 0.
Um Nico ask is the efficiency of
a single nor an NAND gate
equivalent to using one gate?
Or two. Not.
Uh.
Efficiency of single nor Oh
Oh, you said are correct.
That's that's a good thing.
That's a good question. You
could say that. I mean,
instead of let me back here.
So you could say that, uh, this
is the Nor, so we have two
step one or an, then followed by
a not. So this is a two step. So
in order to have a nor by this
design you have to wait two
steps. But as I said in the
market, they already build a
gate for that, so you can apply
nor with one step. So as long as
you have the input with one step
you have the output true. I mean
whenever you need a nor.
Instead of buying an or an
not, you can simply buy a nor
if it is available. So one gate
is much more efficient than
using two gates. So because of
this day already build us the
newer but the design, the
internal design like this. But
when you build it in a physical
sense, you can build in as a one
gate. Uh, throughout the same
is for nand. You could build
an answer if you don't have
with an and and they're not
so to a step, but you can
build an efficient one just
one NAND gate if it is
available on the market.
So I hope I answered your
questions.
Any other questions?
No questions.
So I'm ready at the office hour,
so if there any question about
the lecture or about the labs of
I waiting for you there. Thank
you so much for attending
today's lecture and we continue
this topic next this Wednesday.
Thank you. Have a great day.